[RFC][SPIR-V] Add intrinsics to convert to/from ap.float (#164252)
llvm/llvm-project: llvm/docs/LangRef.rst

Reviewer: These should get generic legalization support

Reviewer: I think this note just makes things worse. It's stating poor QoI as a goal. 

Many intrinsics are broken for different type combinations on different targets, but this isn't a desirable state. There isn't anything target dependent required to legalize these

Author: I think we can always update the document in case if somebody finds useful (and implementable) generic legalization. As of right now I'm having troubles with understanding, how to (generically) legalize FP6 conversions.

Author: What I had in mind is that for FP4 conversions legalization is quite trivial in case if add a look-up table, then FP4 value becomes just an index. After double checking - FP6 case seem to be also trivial as it's indeed just bit shuffling + rounding.

There are FP8 + FN/FNUZ/E8M0FNU case, where generic lowering stops being “just shuffle + one rounding bit” and becomes “shuffle + full special-case semantics + careful NaN/zero rules.”. I lean towards agreeing, that generic legalization is feasible, yet not 100% sure if there will be interest for the intrinsics outside of the use cases, when a hardware supports the conversions in a performant way.

Reviewer: Leaving the legalization out of this PR is fine for now, but I do think it should be implemented. That significantly increases the utility of the intrinsics.

This intrinsic is not supported on all targets. Some targets may not support
all rounding modes.

'``llvm.convert.to.arbitrary.fp``' Intrinsic

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <iNxM> @llvm.convert.to.arbitrary.fp.<iNxM>.<fNxM>(
          <fNxM> <value>, metadata <interpretation>,
          metadata <rounding mode>, i1 <saturation>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.convert.to.arbitrary.fp`` intrinsic converts a native LLVM
floating-point value to an arbitrary FP format, returning the result as an integer
containing the arbitrary FP bits. This intrinsic is overloaded on both its return
type and first argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

``value``
  The native LLVM floating-point value to convert (e.g., ``half``, ``float``, ``double``).

``interpretation``
  A metadata string describing the target arbitrary FP format. Supported format names include:

  - FP8 formats: ``"Float8E5M2"``, ``"Float8E5M2FNUZ"``, ``"Float8E4M3"``,
    ``"Float8E4M3FN"``, ``"Float8E4M3FNUZ"``, ``"Float8E4M3B11FNUZ"``, ``"Float8E3M4"``,
    ``"Float8E8M0FNU"``
  - FP6 formats: ``"Float6E3M2FN"``, ``"Float6E2M3FN"``

>   - FP4 formats: ``"Float4E2M1FN"``

Author: I believe poison is good enough. I've changed the description for intrinsics, hope it address this and other questions.

  representable range of the target format are clamped to the minimum or maximum normal value.
  When ``false``, no saturation is applied. This parameter must be an immediate constant.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The intrinsic converts the native LLVM floating-point value to the arbitrary FP
format specified by ``interpretation``, applying the requested rounding mode and
saturation behavior. The result is returned as an integer (e.g., ``i8`` for FP8,
``i6`` for FP6) containing the encoded arbitrary FP bits. When saturation is enabled,
values that exceed the representable range are clamped to the minimum or maximum
normal value of the target format.

Example:
""""""""

::

      ; Convert half to FP8 E4M3 format
      %fp8bits = call i8 @llvm.convert.to.arbitrary.fp.i8.f16(
          half %value, metadata !"Float8E4M3",
          metadata !"round.tonearest", i1 false)

      ; Convert vector of float to FP8 E5M2 with saturation
      %vec_fp8 = call <4 x i8> @llvm.convert.to.arbitrary.fp.v4i8.v4f32(
          <4 x float> %values, metadata !"Float8E5M2",
          metadata !"round.towardzero", i1 true)

'``llvm.convert.from.arbitrary.fp``' Intrinsic

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <fNxM> @llvm.convert.from.arbitrary.fp.<fNxM>.<iNxM>(
          <iNxM> <value>, metadata <interpretation>,

>           metadata <rounding mode>, i1 <saturation>)

Author: May be "clamp" is a better name, though OCP also uses "saturate". Basically, if a format _have_ representation of inf, we still should be able to specify, that rounding of out of range values clamps to max/min normal value instead of +/- inf. See https://www.opencompute.org/documents/ocp-microscaling-formats-mx-v1-0-spec-final-pdf **Table 3**:

> An implementation must support the saturate
> (SAT) and overflow (OVF) methods outlined in Table 3 for handling conversions of values from
> another format to FP8.

Note, that E5M2 format has infinity representation.

>           metadata <rounding mode>, i1 <saturation>)

Author: Sure, applied

rounded according to the specified rounding mode to fit the target format's precision;
then, if the rounded result exceeds the target format's representable range, saturation
is applied according to the ``saturation`` parameter. The result is returned as an
integer (e.g., ``i8`` for FP8, ``i6`` for FP6) containing the encoded arbitrary FP bits.

**Handling of special values:**

- **NaN**: If the input is NaN and the target format supports NaN, it is converted to a NaN
  representation in the target format. The exact NaN payload and quiet/signaling status are
  implementation-defined; implementations may preserve them when the target supports it.
  If the target format does not support NaN, the intrinsic returns a poison value.
- **Infinity**: If the input is +/-Inf:

  - When ``saturation`` is ``false`` and the target format supports infinity, +/-Inf is preserved.
  - When ``saturation`` is ``false`` and the target format does not support infinity (e.g., formats
    with "FN" suffix), the intrinsic returns a poison value.
  - When ``saturation`` is ``true``, +/-Inf is clamped to the maximum/minimum representable finite value.

> - **Overflow**: When a finite value exceeds the representable range:

Reviewer 2: Can probably combine this with the previous section as "If the input is +/-Inf or a finite value that exceeds the representable range", as the bullet points are the same (I think?)

  - When ``saturation`` is ``true``, the value is clamped to the maximum/minimum representable finite value.
  - When ``saturation`` is ``false`` and the target format supports infinity, the value becomes +/-Inf.
  - When ``saturation`` is ``false`` and the target format does not support infinity, the intrinsic
    returns a poison value.

> For FP6/FP4 interpretations, producers are expected to use ``saturation`` = ``true``; using ``saturation`` = ``false`` and generating NaN/Inf/overflowing values is undefined (poison).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For FP6/FP4 interpretations, producers are expected to use ``saturation`` = ``true``; using ``saturation`` = ``false`` and generating NaN/Inf/overflowing values results in a poison value.
```
Avoid using the term "undefined" here.

Example:
""""""""

::

      ; Convert half to FP8 E4M3 format
      %fp8bits = call i8 @llvm.convert.to.arbitrary.fp.i8.f16(
          half %value, metadata !"Float8E4M3",
          metadata !"round.tonearest", i1 false)

      ; Convert vector of float to FP8 E5M2 with saturation
      %vec_fp8 = call <4 x i8> @llvm.convert.to.arbitrary.fp.v4i8.v4f32(
          <4 x float> %values, metadata !"Float8E5M2",
          metadata !"round.towardzero", i1 true)

> '``llvm.convert.from.arbitrary.fp``' Intrinsic

Author: I removed saturation and rounding as they are not needed for 'mini-float' to float conversions. There can be one exception of E8M0 to half precision conversion, but if needed - it can be done without an intrinsic.

This intrinsic is not supported on all targets. Some targets may not support
all rounding modes.

'``llvm.arbitrary.fp.convert``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

>       declare <type> @llvm.arbitrary.fp.convert(

Author: Resolved: 1 intrinsic -> 2 intrinsics with no int conversions.

          <type> <value>, metadata <result interpretation>,
          metadata <input interpretation>, metadata <rounding mode>,
          i32 <saturation>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.arbitrary.fp.convert`` intrinsic performs conversions
between values whose interpretation differs from their representation
in LLVM IR. The intrinsic is overloaded on both its return type and first
argument. Metadata operands describe how the raw bits should be interpreted

> before and after the conversion.

Reviewer: I'd expect to have 2 intrinsics. One uses the natural IR fp type as the source, and the other for the result. Do you need the exotic-fp-to-other-exotic-FP case?

Reviewer 3: If there are 2 intrinsics, then it's simpler to avoid overlap with existing instructions for IR -> IR (which may be a good thing?)
Isel should be able to fold the 2 into a single exotic->exotic instruction if available for the target no?

Author: FYI: we (Intel) have a use case for FP4 -> FP8 conversion. Spec itself is covered by https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/20467 . But I'm changing the patch to have 2 intrinsics anyway, it indeed simplifies the semantic.

``result interpretation``
  A metadata string that describes the type of the result. The string
  can be ``"none"`` (no conversion needed), ``"signed"`` or ``"unsigned"`` (for
  integer types), or any target-specific string for floating-point formats.
  For example ``"spv.E4M3EXT"`` and ``"spv.E5M2EXT"`` stand for FP8 SPIR-V formats.
  Using ``"none"`` indicates the converted bits already have the desired LLVM IR type.

``input interpretation``
  Mirrors ``result interpretation`` but applies to the first argument. The
  interpretation is target-specific and describes how to interpret the raw bits
  of the input value.

``rounding mode``
  A metadata string. The permitted strings match those accepted by
  :ref:`llvm.fptrunc.round <int_fptrunc_round>` (for example,
  ``"round.tonearest"`` or ``"round.towardzero"``). The string ``"none"`` may be
  used to indicate that the default rounding behaviour of the conversion should
  be used.

``saturation``
  An integer constant (0 or 1) indicating whether saturation should be applied
  to the conversion. When set to 1, values outside the representable range of
  the result type are clamped to the minimum or maximum representable value

>   instead of wrapping. When set to 0, no saturation is applied.

Reviewer 2: Why is this an i32 and not an i1?

> Semantics:

Author: This behaviour is something that I wouldn't desire. New version of the patch removes 'none'.

""""""""""

The intrinsic interprets the first argument according to ``input
interpretation``, applies the requested rounding mode and saturation behavior,
and produces a value whose type is described by ``result interpretation``.
When saturation is enabled, values that exceed the representable range of the target
format are clamped to the minimum or maximum representable value of that format.

> 

Reviewer 2: This could really use some examples of different type combinations.

As I understand it, there are basically three overloads here a) IR FP type, b) IR integer type, c) IR integer type interpreted as FP type.
